For a few hours in May 2016, for the first time in more than a century,
Britain did not burn any coal in the production of electricity.
None at all.
All coal-fired power plants were disconnected.
And this is one of the reasons.
Welcome to the wind farm in Griffin, Scotland.
68 turbines with a total capacity of more than 150 megawatts.
And these turbines rotate in real time and set the leaves to the wind.
With full performance, this farm can feed all cities.
But as the world is inclined to renewable energy,
we have a little problem.
Since coal, oil, gas and nuclear power plants are basically just giant boilers.
They take water, they heat it, it turns into a couple,
steam is driven through a huge turbine that rotates and generates current.
When I say "turbine", I do not mean such sheets.
I mean hundreds of tons of steel rotating at several thousand revolutions per second.
And all these turbines across the power grid
rotating synchronously.
After transduction, they have all 50 revolutions per second.
In America 60.
All in perfect harmony: One slows down, all slow down.
One will speed up, all will accelerate.
And this prevents the blinking of your bulbs permanently.
Because the power supply must always be almost exactly the same as the power consumption.
There is not a large enough battery for national electricity storage.
So if the power plant is suddenly disconnected from the system,
where will the electricity be taken from?
The response is the kinetic energy of those turbines
those thousands of tons of steel rotating all over the country.
Households and factories literally vacuum the turbine's kinetic energy
to overcome the decline, thereby slowing it down.
But it will not be a problem for some 60 seconds
and during that time the State Bureau of Network Administration, what I know,
the next fuel rod grips the grill
and will increase the performance of other power plants. This will cover consumption.
But it depends on the amount of rotating matter
or insufficient inertia of the system.
And on this turbine?
You see for yourself.
No thousand tons of rotating steel
just a few sheets, a little metal
and a few circuits that send the electricity to the grid at the right frequency.
If the whole system was driven only by the wind and the sun
it would have no rotating matter. No system stability.
As soon as the supply and consumption were dismantled, the circuit breakers would fail,
and everything would collapse.
There are possible solutions.
The pumping power stations are here some Friday,
these are the two lakes at different heights.
With excess electricity, the water is pumped up
and if shorted it is sent down through the generators.
But it takes seconds to minutes.
It is also being experimented, for example, with molten glass containers,
compressed air and flywheels
but so far all are experimental and not very effective.
The real solution may come from something unexpected.
Because yes, the wind replaces coal and diesel,
but it also replaces the gasoline that you can refuel in.
And as more and more electric cars connect to the system,
there will be a lot of relatively large computer batteries.
Your car could sell your electricity back to the system in real time
second after a second, as needed.
Add smart appliances and gauges to system supervision,
find out when to turn on the air conditioning and fridge
and there is a system that is largely counterbalanced by itself.
Yes, there is still a need for a turbine,
some large mass of rotating steel to offset small instantaneous outages,
but the solution to balancing the power grid is not as we imagined 20 years ago.
They are not large, monolithic batteries.
There are millions of small ones all over the country.
Many thanks to all of the SSE team,
who helped me with the team on this wind turbine.
I am incredibly grateful.
They helped us beyond the scope of our duties, so please,
look at the links in the description for more info
about them and the Griffin wind farm.
translated by Václav Fejt corrected by Stanislav Kneifl